.\"
.TH MARKDOWN-CALIBRE "1" "August 2021" "markdown-calibre" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
markdown-calibre \- convert Markdown text to XHTML/HTML
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B markdown-calibre
[\fI\,options\/\fR] [\fI\,INPUTFILE\/\fR]
.PP
(STDIN is assumed if no INPUTFILE is given)
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
A Python implementation of John Gruber's Markdown.
.IP
https://python-markdown.github.io/
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-\-version\fR
show program's version number and exit
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
show this help message and exit
.TP
\fB\-f\fR \fI\,OUTPUT_FILE\/\fR, \fB\-\-file\fR=\fI\,OUTPUT_FILE\/\fR
Write output to \fI\,OUTPUT_FILE\/\fR. Defaults to STDOUT.
.TP
\fB\-e\fR \fI\,ENCODING\/\fR, \fB\-\-encoding\fR=\fI\,ENCODING\/\fR
Encoding for input and output files.
.TP
\fB\-o\fR \fI\,OUTPUT_FORMAT\/\fR, \fB\-\-output_format\fR=\fI\,OUTPUT_FORMAT\/\fR
Use output format 'xhtml' (default) or 'html'.
.TP
\fB\-n\fR, \fB\-\-no_lazy_ol\fR
Observe number of first item of ordered lists.
.TP
\fB\-x\fR \fI\,EXTENSION\/\fR, \fB\-\-extension\fR=\fI\,EXTENSION\/\fR
Load extension \fI\,EXTENSION\/\fR.
.TP
\fB\-c\fR \fI\,CONFIG_FILE\/\fR, \fB\-\-extension_configs\fR=\fI\,CONFIG_FILE\/\fR
Read extension configurations from \fI\,CONFIG_FILE\/\fR.
\fI\,CONFIG_FILE\/\fR must be of JSON or YAML format. YAML format
requires that a python YAML library be installed. The
parsed JSON or YAML must result in a python dictionary
which would be accepted by the 'extension_configs'
keyword on the markdown.Markdown class. The extensions
must also be loaded with the `\-\-extension` option.
.TP
\fB\-q\fR, \fB\-\-quiet\fR
Suppress all warnings.
.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-verbose\fR
Print all warnings.
.TP
\fB\-\-noisy\fR
Print debug messages.
